good day I'm Norman Wildberger last time I
left you with some controversial ideas about
square root of two basically I pointed out what
should be really obvious to everybody is that the
current idea of square root of two as being some
infinite complicated decimal that keeps on going
and going and that we can actually address as an
arithmetic object he is some kind of fantasy now
some of you may be wondering well are we going to
do the same thing for other so-called irrational
numbers like pi or e well we are going to have
a very close look at those things and we are
going to see that the current treatment of them
falls far short of what it really ought to be
it turns out that pi is not really a number it's
something much more complicated than that and as
an initial orientation I'd like to put the seed
in your mind that PI is actually a landscape to
compare it to a number like 5 or minus 3 halves is
diminishing it that's not really where it fits so
here's a little test just that you can think
about to give you some practice in in trying
to figure out what exactly do you believe in
what exactly should you believe in suppose we
take the three simplest rational numbers which
arguably maybe are 1/2 1/3 and 1/4 so let me
ask you a first question it's a computational
question it's something that you could answer
with a piece of paper and write down an answer
on a piece of paper it is what is the sum 1/2
plus 1/3 plus 1/4 so I want you to make that
computation and I want you to write down the
answer on a piece of paper and circle it having
done that and I'm sure you will all succeeded
that I'm now going to ask you a second question
this is a question about real numbers in quotes
let's suppose that real numbers really do exist
let's take arguably the most common real numbers
that are around root 2 pi and e ok and I'm gonna
ask you to make a computation I'm going to ask
you to compute the sum root 2 plus PI plus E so
please make that computation and write down the
answer on a piece of paper and circle it if you
honestly do those two questions I think you will
learn a lot about arithmetic with real numbers
we're to be talking a lot more about that very
controversial subject and I'll have a lot more
heretical things to say heretical things which
happen to be true today we're going to look at an
alternative to our standard arithmetic which is
more geared towards approximation to scientific
work that's quite interesting and that involves
some interesting kind of mathematics purely from
the pure point of view so we're going to look at
measurement approximation and something that
I'm going to call interval arithmetic and in
setting this up it's a good chance for us to go
back and have another look at some very early
definitions from the start of this series and
remind ourselves about some concepts that we
may have forgotten about ok so here's a very
useful theorem relating to order relating to
the idea that we have a less than or greater than
notion for natural numbers so we're working in the
framework of natural numbers and this theorem is
that if m and n are natural numbers then one of
the following three things happens then either M
is less than n or M equals n or M is bigger than n
so let me remind you that the natural numbers
were the first things that we started talking
about in this series long time ago back in math
foundations one you might want to have a look at
that if you haven't had a look at it already
and we introduced the natural numbers in a
very primitive way just like an ancestor hundred
thousand years ago might have done one one one one
one one strokes on a page representing the various
numbers in increasing size each time adding one
more stroke to go from a number to its successor
alright so if we have two of these numbers say m
and n and they are not equal then as we go through
this list eventually we get to M first when we get
to n first if they're not equal we're gonna get
to one of them first well if M comes first then M
is by definition less than n and if n comes first
then M is by definition bigger than an u so this
is very primitive very close to the fundamental
nature of natural numbers this idea of order of
that there's a sequence that some numbers come
before others that some numbers are smaller than
others pretty well most other notions of order
in number systems in some way reduced to this
one it's reasonable to now try to extend this idea
of order from natural numbers to integers let's
go back and remind ourselves how we constructed
integers from natural numbers in the first place
so we defined an integer to be a pair of natural
numbers which we wrote in this fashion and we said
m less m with a particular notion of equality that
M less n was equal to K less L nicely when M plus
L happened to equal K plus N and for example
minus three what we usually call minus three
now was originally defined perhaps by this pair of
natural numbers one less four and that's equal to
two less five or equal to three less six and why
are these two equal well because one plus five
equals two plus four so this pair of natural
numbers encodes for us where is an expression
that we can interpret as what we usually call
the integer minus three and I remind you that
was occurring in math foundations twelve so you
could remind yourself about how the basic ideas of
integers were set up there the type is represented
by int and let me well I'm at it remind you about
what a rational number was a rational number
was defined as a pair of integers so say a over
B just different notation a different expression
where a and B are now integers with the proviso
that the second one B had better not be zero and
there was also a notion of equality between these
kinds of expressions that a over B equals C over
D precisely when ad equals BC and there was a nice
kind of parallel between this and this so somehow
the way we construct integers from natural numbers
is analogous to the way we construct rational
numbers from integers except that instead of
having addition involved we have multiplication
involved and that defined for us this new type of
mathematical object the rational numbers so we'd
like to extend our notions of order to integers
first and then to rational numbers later on so
here's a useful theorem that if M N and K are
all natural numbers and if M is less than n then
M plus K is less than n plus K and also M times
K is less than n times K so we can prove these by
going back to what they mean leave the proof as an
exercise for you to think about I hope these are
reasonably clear properties of the order relation
and there of course useful relations because
we want to manipulate inequalities sort of the
way we manipulates equations so here's another
theorem that's a variant on that previous one
where we have for natural numbers now m and n as
well as P and Q and well suppose that M is less
than n and that P is less than Q then M plus P is
less than and plus Q and also M times P is less
than and times Q so very much in the same spirit
as the previous one but slightly something of an
extension all right so now let's go to integers
and ask how are we going to define order for
integers the idea of one integer being less than
another integer well let's suppose we have two
integers a is M less n and B is K less L where
these guys m and K del are all natural numbers
okay so we can make a definition what does it mean
for a to be less than B we can define what that
means this way we can say that it means that m+
L he is less than K plus n so I remind you that
these things would be actually equal if there
was equality here so we're taking the formula
for equality and changing it just a little bit by
replacing the equal signs with less than signs and
if we want to include the inequality with equality
then we can use this less than or equal sign which
means that either a is less than B or it's equal
to B so this covers both cases well then someone
obviously this inequality here is going to change
to this mixed inequality M plus L less than or
equal to k plus M so let's illustrate this suppose
we have here are two integers minus 3 and minus 1
we agree that minus 3 ought to be less than minus
1 and we can see that because if we write minus 3
as an actual pair of natural numbers say 1 less
4 and if we write minus 1 as a pair of natural
numbers say 5 less 6 then what do we have to check
we have to check that this Plus this is less than
this Plus this 1 plus 6 is less than 5 plus 4 that
is indeed true because 7 is less than 9 telling us
that yes minus 3 really is less than minus 1 so
what we're doing is very systematically in a way
that a computer would love we're reducing the idea
of order for integers to the already established
idea of order for natural numbers so here's
another example with a less than or equal to
relation 0 is less than or equal to 10 why is that
how do we write zero as a pair of natural numbers
for less four will do we can also use one less one
or two less two that's how we define zero zero was
not actually a natural number to begin with it was
constructed from the natural numbers at the same
time as we were constructing the integers that's
how we chose to set things up it's of course not
the only way but with this formulation zero is 4
or less 4 10 is say 11 unless one that's now 10 as
an integer well here the 11 and the 1 are natural
numbers alright so is this integer less than or
equal to this integer well we have to compute 4
plus 1 now we have to compare that with 11 plus
4 and yes 4 plus 1 is less than or equal to 11
plus 4 because that's 5 and that's 15 and the
natural number 5 is indeed less than or equal to
the natural number 15 I suppose you can kind of
see here that natural numbers and integers are so
close to being the same kind of thing we're using
the same symbols for them ultimately probably
officially we should really write integers in
this fashion because that's actually how they were
defined to be but that's too laborious for us so
we prefer to use these standard hindu-arabic
symbols for integers with the occasional minus
sign thrown in but in terms of our computers our
computers probably want to keep natural numbers
and integers separate that's a natural thing to
do so we have arithmetic with natural numbers over
here we have arithmetic with integers over here
perhaps they correspond perhaps they look a lot
the same in some situations but nevertheless the
computer probably wants to keep them separate so
we have to be aware of that that we're cheating
a little bit when we write down things like this
and are not being clear about whether this ten
is ten as a natural number or ten as an integer
technically those are two different mathematical
objects numbers can be used for counting or for a
measurement and some of the time we can count or
measure completely precisely other times we can
measure or count only roughly only approximately
it's the nature of scientific work is that often
you have to deal with a certain amount of
observational error nevertheless we often
know that a reading or a measurement is in a
certain range and so now I want to introduce
another kind of arithmetic that is in some sense
more in line with scientific measurements which
incorporates errors which incorporates the idea
of approximation we're gonna call this interval
arithmetic and although it's probably been written
down somewhere perhaps many times it doesn't
appear to be a well-known area of investigation
you'll see that it deserves some attention so
we're going to start by talking about intervals
for natural numbers which is the simplest way to
start because our natural numbers are the simplest
numbers so here they are now in slightly more
sophisticated hindu-arabic form and I've put a
box around certain numbers so my daughter is in
high school and in Australia high school is from
years 7 to 12 so if I tell you that my daughter is
in high school then you know that she's in year
seven or year eight or year nine or year ten or
year eleven or year twelve but she's not in year
13 and she's not in year five so your knowledge is
restricted but it's not completely precise we want
to introduce some kind of mathematical object that
encodes that so that we can talk reasonably about
this as being an interval of natural numbers and
this particular interval here we're going to
give a name we're going to want to indicate it
label it has square brackets 7 12 this is going to
represent for us this interval of natural numbers
whatever that means another way that this can
arise is perhaps through some kind of observation
so if you have a look over here the certain number
of crosses under my hand I can let you count them
now all right so here you go count them please
okay you had enough time so maybe you didn't count
them precisely and if you had to say precisely how
many there were and you had to make sure that you
didn't say something wrong maybe something like
this is the best you could do you'd say well
there was at least seven and I'm pretty sure that
there weren't more than 12 but I'm not entirely
sure where in here the number actually fell so
that observation that you made might very well
be captured by this same kind of interval so the
interval can arise in a number of different ways
but the question is what should the definition
of an interval be it's a recently interesting
question well one possible definition perhaps
the one that occurs to you first is that we might
define the interval 712 to be the set consisting
of these elements 7 8 9 10 11 12 these are all
natural numbers this is a collection or a set
formed by those six numbers and when we say set
and we're going to use these curly brackets the
convention is usually that we're talking about
something that's unordered so we can actually
jumble the order of these things but the set
wouldn't change okay so this has some pros and
cons this idea of defining the interval to mean
this first of all it corresponds to our intuition
after all this is pretty well the same thing or at
least pretty close to the same thing that I wrote
down in the previous slide the numbers from 7:00
till 12 and it's completely explicit there can be
no doubt it at all about what we're talking about
it's exactly a set there's six elements there's
brackets it's all completely cut and dried the
cons well this could be a laborious kind of object
if we're considering the set 7 120 it means that
actually I'm obliged to write down some braces
and then 7 8 9 10 11 I really have to keep going
all the way up to 120 before I can close off the
braces now this is not 120 but rather 120 million
let's say well then the set is a very very big
object that's going to take up a lot of my hard
drive another complication with this idea is
that when we extend this to rational numbers
which we're going to want to do then suddenly the
set becomes a so called infinite set it completely
blows out on us our hard drives disintegrate with
the effort of trying to squeeze in more and more
and more rational numbers we can't do it so
there's serious problems with infinite sets
and if we try to define an interval in terms of a
set like this we have to deal with these problems
with infinite sets now in most courses in most
textbooks this is exactly what's done 99% of all
definitions of an interval will be the interval 7
to 12 is the set of X such that X is bigger than
or equal to 7 and less than or 12 and there is no
embarrassment about having to resort to infinite
sets and there's usually no explanation of what
that theory of infinite sets that we're using
ears and how it actually works but there's another
problem too that sets are inherently unordered and
so this thing here is also a valid depiction of
this interval if we're working at the set level
and unfortunately if the set is big it can be hard
to recognize whether this set is the same as this
set ultimately the only way you can really do that
is by ordering these guys by sorting the list and
if you have a million entries well sorting it can
be rather labor-intensive if you have a trillion
elements then sorting maybe is beyond you so
we are not going to define intervals as sets
so what are we going to do well here's a good
chance for you to practice your foundational
skills that you've been learning in this
course okay you have been learning about
how to think clearly and solidly about things
and to try to make definitions which are simple
but capture exactly what's going on so here's
a little exercise okay after I'm through here
you can shut the video off for a second and
go off and think about what's the best way
of defining what an interval is okay so
that's the question what exactly is an
interval of natural numbers just sticking with
the simplest case I'm going to give you a clue
okay the clue is definitions are to be close
to specifications you should think about how
you're going to specify an interval to
your friend to your friend who is maybe
on the other side of town or on the other
side of the world what are you going to do
so here is a good solution to that challenge
we're going to define an interval actually a
natural number interval to be a pair M n enclosed
in square brackets of natural numbers which
satisfy the inequality M is less than or equal
to n so what an interval is is an expression
it's something that you write down on a piece
of paper and it has five ingredients the first
ingredient is a left bracket a square left bracket
then a natural number then a comma then another
natural number and then a right square bracket
and there's only one thing that you need to check
to make sure you have an interval that the first
number that you wrote down is less than or equal
to the second one yeah that's satisfied that is an
interval that expression that you've written down
is the interval so the following very intervals 7
12 or we've seen before 7 to 12 thousand 1 5 and
4 4 that's also an acceptable interval because
4 happens to be less than or equal to 4 we allow
these two things to be the same these are examples
of things which are not intervals 12 7 is not an
interval because 12 is not less than or equal to
7 7 8 12 in square brackets is not an interval
because there's three natural numbers they're not
two this thing is not an interval because the the
brackets are braces rather than square brackets
and this thing three-halves 14 thirds well the
entries are rational numbers so far we've only
been talking about natural number intervals so
technically this is not an interval at least not
yet in a little while the will become an interval
but it'll be our an interval in the rational
number context rather than in the natural number
context now let's define a an idea about how two
intervals might be related so what's suppose we
have two intervals the first one is I and we kind
of like capital letters for intervals especially
letters around the ijk area of the alphabet
all right so the interval I happens to be MN
and here's another interval called J it happens to
be KL and we want to define what it means for I to
be a sub interval of the interval J and here's
the condition right here we require that K be
less than or equal to M and that n be less than or
equal to L and in this case this is what we write
we write I with this notation here it may look a
lot like set notation but this is just a symbol
that we're going to use to denote this idea that
I is a sub interval of J for example 4/7 is a sub
interval of 1 7 because well because this thing
here is less than 4 1 is less than or equal to 4
and because this one here this 7 is less than or
equal to this 7 during our minds of course we have
1 7 we're thinking of 4 7 is being inside it some
kind of pictorial way but it's in fact independent
of pictures it's a purely algebraic thing and
it properly captures our idea of what it means
this really ought to be a sub interval of that
so here's a useful theorem about natural numbers
that has a direct application to intervals and
sub intervals so we might call this the ordered
transitivity theorem and there's different aspects
of it there are different cases that we can
consider we have three numbers m and M P in their
natural numbers and we suppose that M is less than
or equal to n and n is less than or equal to P
the conclusion is that in that case M must be
less than or equal to P I hope that's reasonably
obvious and then some variants of that if we had
started with saying that M is less than n and n
is less than or equal to P then we can deduce that
M is less than P or the other way around if M was
less than or equal to n and n was less than P then
also M is strictly less than P okay so here's now
the exercise that if you have three intervals say
capital I J and K and if we know that I is a sub
interval of J and we know that J isn't something
terrible okay then please convince yourself that I
is in fact a sub interval of K all right intervals
become more fun when we realize that we can
do arithmetic with intervals and that this
arithmetic with intervals extends the arithmetic
that we already have with natural numbers it's
another kind of extension of our fundamental
arithmetic just in a way like Pauli numbers were
a extension of arithmetic with numbers this is a
different kind of extension of that fundamental
arithmetic so we have two intervals MN and KL and
here's how we're gonna add them the result is M
plus K and n plus L so one thing that we need to
check is that if this really isn't interval and
this is really an interval how do we know this is
really an interval how do we know that M plus K is
actually less than or equal to n plus L I'll let
you think about that so if M is less than or equal
to n and k is less than or equal to L then true
that M plus K is less than or equal to n plus L
we also have multiplication of two intervals MN x
KL by definition when define that to be M times K
comma n times L so it's a component wise addition
and it's a component wise multiplication so now
we can do arithmetic with intervals so here's
some examples interval 1 2 + interval 4 7 is
the interval 5 9 while 1/2 times 4 7 would be 4
14 here's an example where we're taking intervals
of a rather special kind where the first and the
second entries agree so 7 7 + 8 8 while that's
going to be 15 15 + 7 7 times 8 is 56 56 and this
last example shows that interval arithmetic really
is an extension of ordinary arithmetic when we
restrict ourselves to intervals of this kind
then we're exactly recovering ordinary arithmetic
so these more general intervals is some kind of
bigger arithmetic that inside it contains the
original arithmetic of natural numbers so we
have a new type of object let's introduce this
symbol for it so num interval num for natural
numbers interval for interval so this is the the
type of mathematical object of which these are
examples and now let's point out that there are
many different visualizations of the interval 3/5
this is the expression it's the primary object we
don't need to force this interval to be one thing
or another now we have to have a sort of an open
mind this is expression oriented mathematic not
object-oriented mathematics here we have to allow
the possibility that different people can come
along and interpret this expression in different
ways can extract meanings from it in different
directions here is one possible interpretation
that we have the sequence of natural numbers and
what we're doing is we're capturing or framing
or pinpointing a particular sort of sequence or
segment of that larger sequence in this case three
four or five that's one interpretation of what
three five means another possible interpretation
might be to think in terms of a line that we draw
on a page with equally spaced markings labeled
with various natural numbers in that case the
interval 3 5 might be represented in our minds
or visualized by shading in the part of the line
between 3 & 5 someone else can come along and have
a look at this and say no I want to do something
a little bit differently I'm a scientist and
for me the 3 actually extends all the way up
to 2 and a half and the 5 extends all the way up
to 5 and a half okay so this interval 3 5 then
really goes between the halfway point between 2
& 3 all the way after the halfway point between
5 & 6 that might be another interpretation another
interpretation might just be the set the set 3 4
5 independent of any other natural numbers but
there might be all kinds of other strange and
perhaps useful ways of thinking about it for
example suppose that for some strange reason
we decide to list our natural numbers in some
kind of spiral 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
15 seasoned and around like this we could do it
maybe it has some advantage for something rather
in that case the interval 3 5 could be represented
as part of this picture and if it was a longer
interval we might have the interval actually being
represented by some spiral type object why not
expression is primary the objects that you
associate to it more variable of a secondary
nature now let me introduce you to a new idea that
will play a big role in subsequent development of
this course the idea that an interval can be
interpreted as a property this is a word that
we haven't really used before so it's going to be
a very important word in mathematics in the 21st
century ok so there's just an introduction so an
interval is a new mathematical object we've given
it a name it's a type num interval all right
we're just talking now about natural number
intervals so let's use the standard notation
that we're already used used to that we have a
type there if we want to talk about a particular
object say the interval to 7 to say that it's a
natural number interval we can express that
by writing I is and then we use this little
symbol which looks a lot like element off except
that's extended a little bit and what it means
is that this object is of this type now is it's
telling us that 2 7 actually is a natural number
interval it's close to being the set notation but
it's not set notation because this is not a sense
this is a type which is much more tractable
computationally with sets you have these huge
things that you are fantasizing about with types
you just have conditions that have to be checked
that's the meaning of this that kid means that I
is a natural number interval now let's introduce
an important kind of relation or or property
we'd like to capture the idea that a natural
number say K actually belongs to the interval
in our mind we might think of this interval as
being all the natural numbers from M to n now
we want to capture the idea that K is one of
those natural numbers somewhere between m
and somewhere between n so we're going to
introduce a definition we'll say that if I
is MN a natural number interval and K is a
natural number then this new symbol K okay
looks like a less than sign with a kind of
a horizontal line through it and we'll will say
well well express it as saying has property well
say K has property I precisely when M is less
than or equal to K is less than or equal to n
so this is a new symbol okay it's a new symbol
which will denote for us a property relation
so somewhat loosely okay in in the future
we're gonna use this notation that when we
write something like X and then this symbol P
what it means for us is that the object X has
the property P we're gonna want to describe
mathematical objects so we have this idea of
types which is good but we need something more
refined we need to be able to talk about various
properties that particular mathematical objects
might or might not have for example in the real
world you may have defined what you mean by a cat
so a cat is a type of biological object let's say
my daughter loves cats okay so then you might
ask well there are different properties that
a cat can have a cat can be black I can't can be
white I can be skinny I can sing or not saying a
cat can be hungry so these are various properties
that might be associated with the biological type
cat okay so we're going to want to do something
like that here we have this idea of natural number
but we might want to talk about natural numbers
having certain properties or not having certain
properties and this is the notation the general
set up that we're going to use for that and what
we're saying here is that the interval I can be
interpreted as a property in this fashion we can
talk about X having property I well we would
ordinarily say say K belongs to I that would
be the usual way of saying it but it just means
that K is between the two entries of I all right
so this is a first orientation first introduction
to this new kind of symbol this idea that instead
of having to use sets for everything instead
of having to use sets for types and sets for
properties that we distinguish we have types we
have properties we don't need to be talking about
infinite collections at all all what we have to
do is be able to check whether some object has a
property or not that can be done on a one-by-one
basis it's gonna turn out to be a very powerful
idea that will replace the infinite set theory
to a certain extent for us later on all right
so it's gonna have major foundational implications
so we've been talking about intervals for natural
numbers we've introduced arithmetic for them and
we've introduced the idea of a natural number
belonging to an interval in terms of a property
so it's natural of course to want to extend this
first of all the integers and then ultimately two
rational numbers but let's just go one step at a
time it's already quite interesting that there's
some differences when we go from natural numbers
to integers so most of the discussion extends
immediately so in terms of the definition of a
integer interval it's just a pair of integers now
with the condition that as before a is less than
or equal to B and we can do addition so there's a
integer interval there's another integer interval
and we can add them in just exactly the same way
essentially component wise to get this integer
interval now we can talk about some integer
having the property that it belongs to minus
3 for having the property minus 3 for that means
that minus 2 happens to be between minus 3 and
4 but there's some important differences so one
of the differences is that with integers we not
only have addition and multiplication but we have
subtraction as well that's one of the main points
introducing the integers so suppose we have an
interval a be an integer interval and another
one CD and by the way this is the symbol that
we'll use for integer interval for the type then
we're going to define the difference in a perhaps
somewhat surprising way it's not going to be a
minus C B minus D it's going to be rather a minus
D B minus c a- d B minus C that's a bit surprising
I want you to think about this don't worry you
think is this right does this sound reasonable
why are we doing this this way and as another
exercise I want you to think about how we are
going to define the product of two integer
intervals to give you a clue it's not the same
formula as the formula for the product of two
natural number intervals it's more complicated
all right well that's like this that there's
something different going on here that the
laws of arithmetic for natural number intervals
and the laws of arithmetic for integer intervals
might be different there's associativity of say
multiplication hold here does the distributive law
hold here which laws work which ones don't it's
a great exercise for you to do so put away your
crosswords and Sudokus please and start analyzing
the arithmetic and the laws of arithmetic for
these intervals in these two contexts natural
numbers and integers see what you come up with
next time we're going to continue on in this vein
we'd have a look at some of these issues and we'll
try to move towards arithmetic for rational
numbers which is where the real scientific
applications rise so I hope you'll join me for
that not Norman Wildberger thanks for listening